From Observability to Integrity: Instrumenting zk-SNARK Pipelines with OpenTelemetry

TL;DR

- Observability proves systems run correctly
- zk-SNARKs prove systems cannot cheat
- OpenTelemetry gives visibility into the proving pipeline
- Together they enable verifiable exchanges


I. Introduction

The era of "trust me, bro" crypto exchanges is ending.
Users want verifiable transparency — but publishing raw trade data destroys privacy.
The challenge is proving a trade was executed correctly without revealing who made it or what they hold.

At Krystaline.io, we call the solution Proof of Integrity™.

A zk-SNARK is a cryptographic proof that allows a system to prove a statement is true without revealing the data used to compute it. In our case: proving a trade executed at a fair price, without exposing the trader's identity, wallet balance, or order routing.

Krystaline.io already operates under "Proof of Observability™" — a public dashboard at krystaline.io showing live system uptime, real-time trade feeds, per-service health (Trading Engine, Kong Gateway, RabbitMQ Matcher, Wallet Service), and OpenTelemetry traces clickable through to Jaeger. But observability has a limit:

| Layer | What it proves |
|-------|---------------|
| Observability | The system behaved as expected |
| Integrity | The system could not cheat |

Observability proves the system behaved correctly. Zero-knowledge proofs prove the system could not behave dishonestly. That distinction is the foundation of Proof of Integrity™.

But here is the part nobody talks about: generating these proofs is computationally heavy and operationally complex. To build a reliable, user-facing zero-knowledge pipeline, you must instrument the proving pipeline. This is where OpenTelemetry becomes the unsung hero of cryptographic infrastructure.


II. What Are We Proving? (The Circuits)

Circuit 1: Trade Integrity

For every filled order in our orders table (status='filled'), we generate a proof that the trade executed honestly.

    Public Inputs: tradeHash = SHA256(orderId + trace_id) — using the order_id (e.g., "ORD-1741182320000-1") and the OpenTelemetry trace_id already stored in the orders.trace_id column. Also publicized: priceRange — a ±0.5% bracket around the Binance feed price at execution time.

    Private Inputs: The exact fillPrice (orders.price), the quantity (orders.quantity), and the user_id (UUID foreign key to users.id). These three fields must remain hidden — the price reveals slippage strategy, the quantity reveals position sizing, and the userId is PII.

    The Guarantee: Given a trade that appears in our public /api/v1/public/trades feed, anyone can take the tradeHash, fetch the proof from /api/public/zk/proof/:tradeId, and verify: (1) the trade executed within the stated price range from Binance, (2) it links to a genuine OpenTelemetry trace verifiable in Jaeger, and (3) the proof was generated by the Krystaline circuit — all without learning who traded or the exact fill.

Circuit 2: Solvency (The Merkle Sum Tree)

Using our wallets table (schema: id, user_id, asset, balance, available, locked), we prove that total BTC reserves ≥ total BTC liabilities and total USD reserves ≥ total USD liabilities.

Each user's wallet row contributes a leaf to a Merkle Sum Tree: hash(user_id, btc_balance, usd_balance). The tree root is the totalReserveCommitment (a Pedersen commitment). The proof shows the sum of all leaves equals the claimed total — without revealing any individual balance. Our wallets table stores balances as integers in smallest units (satoshis for BTC, cents for USD), which maps directly to circuit arithmetic.

    Timing: Trade Integrity proofs are generated in real-time, post-settlement. Solvency proofs are generated every 60 seconds from aggregate wallet queries.

The conceptual pipeline:

    Trade Event
       ↓
    OTel Trace ID
       ↓
    Witness Generation
       ↓
    Circuit Execution
       ↓
    zk Proof
       ↓
    Client Verification


III. The Architecture: Node.js, Circom, and snarkjs

A common misconception is that zero-knowledge systems require a separate Rust or GPU proving cluster. In practice, modern tooling like snarkjs allows proof generation to integrate directly into existing Node.js services. ZK systems do not need to live in separate infrastructure stacks.

Our server is a TypeScript monolith running on Node.js 20-alpine, deployed as a Kubernetes pod via Helm. We chose snarkjs (iden3's JavaScript implementation) because it runs natively in our existing runtime — no sidecar containers, no gRPC bridges, no language boundary. Circom compiles arithmetic circuits to .wasm (witness generator) and .zkey (proving key) files that snarkjs consumes via standard import.

Circom's compiler is written in Rust, but this only runs once during the Docker build phase. The output — trade_integrity.wasm and trade_integrity_final.zkey — are static artifacts baked into the image. At runtime, the kx-exchange server calls snarkjs.groth16.fullProve() using pure JavaScript. No Rust at runtime.

Our first trade integrity circuit compiles to ~180k constraints and produces proofs in ~400ms on commodity hardware.

Phased Rollout:

    Phase 1 (Immediate): A mock proving service that generates SHA256-based commitments mirroring the exact API shape of real Groth16 proofs — same endpoints, same JSON structure, same frontend verification UX. This unblocks hero page development and ships the visual experience immediately.

    Phase 2 (Follow-up): Swap in compiled Circom circuits. The API contract is identical — only the backend implementation changes.


IV. The Missing Link: Why OpenTelemetry is Mandatory for ZK

The biggest challenge with zk-SNARKs in production is not the cryptography — it's operating the proving pipeline reliably.

ZK pipelines are distributed systems problems, not just cryptography problems.

Generating a single Groth16 proof is a multi-stage proving pipeline with four sequential operations, each traced as individual OTel spans under the trade's existing trace context:

    1. data.fetch — Query orders + wallets tables for private inputs. ~2-5ms.
    2. witness.generate — Run the Circom witness calculator (WASM). CPU-bound, ~50-200ms.
    3. proof.generate — snarkjs.groth16.prove(). Elliptic curve pairings. ~400ms for our circuit.
    4. proof.verify — snarkjs.groth16.verify(). Sanity check. ~10-50ms.

If step 3 stalls due to memory pressure from concurrent proofs, the RabbitMQ order.match span completes normally but the proof span hangs — without dedicated tracing, this is invisible.

What OTel gives us:

    Latency visibility — per-phase duration histograms (witness vs prove vs verify)
    Circuit failure debugging — constraint violation errors with orderId correlation, without logging private inputs
    Proof queue backpressure — gauge tracking proving queue depth to trigger pod scaling
    Proving throughput — proofs/second counter feeding Grafana dashboards and GoAlert alerts

Our orders table already stores the OpenTelemetry trace_id for every trade. The zk-proof-service creates child spans under this same traceId. Opening a trade in Jaeger shows the complete lifecycle: HTTP POST /api/v1/orders → order.submit → RabbitMQ publish → order.match → wallet.settle → zk.prove — all in one trace waterfall.

ZK-specific Prometheus metrics:

    kx_zk_proofs_generated_total{circuit="trade_integrity|solvency"}
    kx_zk_proof_generation_seconds{circuit, phase}
    kx_zk_proof_queue_depth
    kx_zk_proof_failures_total{circuit, reason}


V. The User Experience: "Don't Trust, Verify"

The TransparencyDashboard at krystaline.io gets a new "Zero-Knowledge Proofs" section showing live stats: proofs generated, verification rate, average proof time. A visual "Proof Pipeline" animation shows Trade → Hash → Circuit → Proof → Verify ✓, with flowing dots matching the existing trace visualization.

When a user clicks any trade in the Live Trade Feed, a "Verify Proof" button:

    1. Fetches the proof from /api/public/zk/proof/{tradeId}
    2. The browser downloads the verification key and runs snarkjs.groth16.verify() locally
    3. Displays an animated ✓ with "Proof Valid — Verified locally in your browser"

The user does not trust our server's verification endpoint. They run the math themselves. That is the "Don't Trust, Verify" moment.

The existing "ant swarm" trace animation (dots flowing between Gateway → Exchange → Matcher → Settle) gets a fifth node: "ZK Prove" — making proof generation time as visible as matching time.


VI. Conclusion

Observability proves a system is running correctly.
Zero-knowledge proofs prove it cannot cheat.

The next generation of exchanges will need both.

Our existing OpenTelemetry instrumentation — tracing every order from HTTP ingress through RabbitMQ matching to wallet settlement — guarantees the ZK pipeline is healthy. The ZK proofs guarantee the trade data shown is mathematically truthful. Together, they form Proof of Integrity™.

At Krystaline.io, we believe Proof of Integrity™ will become the new baseline for financial infrastructure.

As circuits mature, we extend proofs to cover BTC transfer integrity, cross-user fairness (order timestamp proofs), and regulatory compliance (proving AML checks passed without revealing KYC data). The infrastructure is already in place — OTel traces, PostgreSQL data model, Kubernetes orchestration. We are adding the mathematical seal.